Combining Voting and Abstract Argumentation to Understand Online Discussions

Michael Bernreiter Jan Maly

Diagramming the Enthymematic Structure of Counterarguments by Andrea Rocci

"On Dialogue Systems with Speech Acts, Arguments, and Counterarguments" by Henry Prakken

"On Formalising Dialogue Systems for Argumentation in Event Calculus" by Lianne Bodenstaff

"A Theory of Philosophical Arguments"

Author: Christoph Lumer

Dialogue Modeling in a Dynamic Framework by Maria Boritchev

Inferences and Dialogues in Ludics by Christophe Fouqueré

Intelligence and Spirit by Reza Negarestani

Representing the Structure of a Debate by Maralee Harrell

TheDynamicsofArgumentativeDiscourse by AlexanderW.Kocurek

Inferential Semantics as Argumentative Dialogues by Davide Catta

Relevance and Utility in an Argumentative Framework.

An Application to the Accommodation of Discourse Topics. by Gerhard Schaden

A mathematical treatment of

defeasible reasoning and its

implementation by G u i l l e r m o R. Simari 

DISCOURSE RELATIONS AND DEFEASIBLE KNOWLEDGE by A l e x L a s c a r i d e s 

The Epistemological Theory of Argument-

How and Why?

CHRISTOPH LUMER

Towards Argument-based Foundation for

Sceptical and Credulous Dialogue Games

P.M. THANG

Ludics, dialogue and inferentialism

Ludics, dialogue and inferentialism

Alain Lecomte

Argumentation and Inference: A Unified Approach

Argumentation and Inference: A Unified Approach

Christophe Fouqueré

A taxonomy of argumentation models used

for knowledge representation

Jamal Bentahar

Dialogical Argumentation and Textual

Entailment

DavideCatta

Understanding Failures and Potentials of Argumentation Tools

for Public Deliberation by Anna De Liddo

THEORY THROUGH ARGUMENT: APPLYING

ARGUMENT MAPPING TO FACILITATE THEORY

BUILDING

David Murungi

On Logical Specifications of the Argument

Interchange Format

by Floris Bex

AIF+: Dialogue in the Argument

Interchange Format by 

Chris Reed

The Argument Interchange Format (AIF) Specification

Argumentation Research Group, School of Computing, University of Dundee

Argumentation Schemes.

History, Classifications, and Computational

Applications

Fabrizio Macagno

A denotational semantics for deliberation dialogues

Peter McBurney

The Eightfold Way of Deliberation Dialogue

Peter McBurney

A Game-Theoretic Perspective on the

Notion of Argument Strength in Abstract

Argumentation by

Paul-Amaury MATT

Building Epistemically Healthier Platforms by

Dallas Amico-Korby

Structure and function of argumentations

An epistemological approach to determining criteria for the validity

and adequacy of argumentations by

Christoph Lumer

A categorical approach to the semantics of

argumentation by Simon Ambler ("Argumentation is a proof theoretic paradigm for reasoning under uncertainty. Whereas a

'proof establishes its conclusion outright, an 'argument' can only lend a measure of support.

Thus, the process of argumentation consists of identifying all the arguments for a particular

hypothesis <f>, and then calculating the support for </ > from the weight attached to these

individual arguments. Argumentation has been incorporated as the inference mechanism of

a large scale medical expert system, the 'Oxford System of Medicine' (OSM), and it is

therefore important to demonstrate that the approach is theoretically justified. This paper

provides a formal semantics for the notion of argument embodied in the OSM. We present a

categorical account in which arguments are the arrows of a semilattice enriched category.

The axioms of a cartesian closed category are modified to give the notion of an 'evidential

closed category', and we show that this provides the correct enriched setting in which to

model the connectives of conjunction (&) and implication (=>).

Finally, we develop a theory of 'confidence measures' over such categories, and relate this to

the Dempster-Shafer theory of evidence.")

Argumentation Semantics

as Formal Discussion by

Martin Caminada

Do It Yourself Content and the Wisdom of the Crowds by

Dallas Amico‑Korby

