Towards Large Scale Argumentation Support on the Semantic Web
Iyad Rahwan
Institute of Informatics
British University in Dubai
P.O.Box 502216, Dubai, UAE
(Fellow) School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh, UK
Fouad Zablith
Institute of Informatics
British University in Dubai
P.O.Box 502216, Dubai, UAE
Chris Reed
School of Computing
University of Dundee, UK
Dundee DD1 4HN, Scotland
Abstract
This paper lays theoretical and software foundations for a
World Wide Argument Web (WWAW): a large-scale Web of
inter-connected arguments posted by individuals to express
their opinions in a structured manner. First, we extend the
recently proposed Argument Interchange Format (AIF) to express arguments with a structure based on Walton’s theory of
argumentation schemes. Then, we describe an implementation of this ontology using the RDF Schema language, and
demonstrate how our ontology enables the representation of
networks of arguments on the Semantic Web. Finally, we
present a pilot Semantic Web-based system, ArgDF, through
which users can create arguments using different argumentation schemes and can query arguments using a Semantic
Web query language. Users can also attack or support parts
of existing arguments, use existing parts of an argument in
the creation of new arguments, or create new argumentation
schemes. As such, this initial public-domain tool is intended
to seed a variety of future applications for authoring, linking,
navigating, searching, and evaluating arguments on the Web.
Introduction
A variety of opinions and arguments are presented every day
on the Web, in discussion forums, blogs, news sites, etc. As
such, the Web acts as an enabler of large-scale argumentation, where different views are presented, challenged, and
evaluated by contributors and readers. However, these methods do not capture the explicit structure of argumentative
viewpoints. This makes the task of evaluating, comparing
and identifying the relationships among arguments difficult.
Imagine querying the Web by asking ‘List all arguments
that support the War on Iraq on the basis of expert assessment that Iraq has Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMDs).’
You are presented with various arguments ordered based on
strength (calculated based on the number and quality of its
supporting and attacking arguments). One of these arguments is a blog entry, with a semantic link to a CIA report
claiming the presence of WMDs. You inspect the counterarguments to the CIA reports and find an argument that attacks
them by stating that ‘CIA experts are biased.’ You inspect
this attacking argument and you find a link to a news article
discussing various historical examples of the CIA’s alignment with government policies, and so on.
Copyright c 2007, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
Motivated by the above vision, we lay theoretical and
software foundations of a World Wide Argument Web
(WWAW): a large-scale Web of inter-connected arguments
posted by individuals on the World Wide Web in a structured manner. The theoretical foundation is an ontology
of arguments, extending the recently proposed Argument
Interchange Format (Chesnevar ˜ et al. 2007), and capturing Walton’s general theoretical account of argumentation
schemes (Walton 1996). For the software foundation, we
implement the ontology using the RDF Schema ontology
language (Brickley & Guha 2004) and present a pilot Semantic Web-based system, ArgDF, through which users can
create arguments using different schemes and can query arguments using a Semantic Web query language. Users can
also attack or support parts of existing arguments, or use
existing parts of an argument in the creation of new arguments. ArgDF also enables users to create new argumentation schemes from the user interface. As such, ArgDF is an
open platform not only for representing arguments, but also
for building interlinked and dynamic argument networks on
the Semantic Web. This initial public-domain tool is intended to seed what it is hoped will become a rich suite of
sophisticated applications for authoring, linking, navigating,
searching, and evaluating arguments on the Web.
The paper advances the state of the art in computational
modelling of argumentation in three ways. First, it presents
the first Semantic Web-based system for argument annotation, navigation and manipulation. Second, the paper provides the first highly-scalable yet highly-structured argument representation capability on the Web. Finally, the paper contributes to the recently proposed Argument Interchange Format (AIF) ontology (Chesnevar ˜ et al. 2007) by
extending it to capture Walton’s argument schemes (Walton 1996) and providing a complete implementation of the
AIF in a Semantic Web language. If successful, the WWAW
will be the largest argumentation support system ever built
because its construction is not centralised, but distributed
across contributors and software developers in the model of
many emerging Web 2.0 applications.
Related Work
Argumentation-based techniques have found a wide range
of applications in artificial intelligence and computer science. An area that has witnessed significant growth is
argumentation-support systems (ASS) (Kirschner, Shum, &
Carr 2003). State-of-the-art ASS’s suffer two main limita1446
tions. Firstly, they usually support a small number of participants. Secondly, most of them target specific domains, such
as education (Rowe, Reed, & Katzav 2003) or jurisprudence
ArguMed (Verheij 2003). Consequently, they are based on
specialised approaches to argumentation.
The World Wide Web can be seen as an ideal platform for
supporting large-scale argumentative expression and communication, due to its ubiquity and openness. On-line discussion forums, such as Deme (Davies et al. 2004), can provide a medium for such communication. However, while
discussions may be identified by their topics, time, or participants, there is a lack of fine-grained structure that captures the details of how different facts, opinions, and arguments contribute to the overall result. Having such structure
could enable better visualisation, navigation and analysis of
the ‘state of the debate’ by participants or automated tools.
Automate support for argumentation may exploit the underlying structure, for example, to discover inconsistencies or
synergies among arguments.
Recently, some Web-based tools have begun to enable
simple structuring of arguments. The truthmapping1 system supports a large number of participants but it only distinguishes premises and conclusions, without providing a
distinction among different types of arguments, and without
cross-referencing complex interactions among arguments. A
similar effort is being explored in Discourse DB,
2 which was
released to the public in late 2006. It provides a forum for
commentators to post their opinions about political events
and issues. Opinions or arguments are organised by topic,
and classified into three categories: for, against, and mixed.
Moreover, content may be browsed by topic, author, or publication type. Discourse DB is powered by Semantic MediaWiki (Volkel ¨ et al. 2006) and can export content into RDF
format for use by other Semantic Web applications.
Our aim in this paper is to combine the strengths of ASS’s
and the Semantic Web to enable highly-scalable yet highlystructured argument representation and processing capability in an open Web environment.
Desiderata
We propose a radically different approach to promoting
large-scale argumentation. Instead of building yet another
system for supporting discourse among small or mediumsize groups of participants, we aim to build an open, extensible and reusable infrastructure for large-scale argument representation, manipulation, and (eventually) evaluation. We
now list a set of key requirements that we believe are important to enable large-scale argument annotation on the Web.
1. The WWAW must support the storage, creation, update
and querying of argumentative structures;
2. The WWAW must have Web-accessible repositories;
3. The WWAW language must be based on open standards,
enabling collaborative development of new tools;
4. The WWAW must employ a unified, extensible argumentation ontology;
5. The WWAW must support the representation, annotation
and creation of arguments using a variety of schemes.
1
See http://www.truthmapping.com 2
See http://discoursedb.org
Argument Interchange Format (AIF): Core
The AIF is a core ontology of argument-related concepts,
and can be extended to capture a variety of argumentation
formalisms and schemes. The AIF core ontology assumes
that argument entities can be represented as nodes in a directed graph called an argument network.
In the interest of simplicity, we shall use a set-theoretic
approach to describing the AIF. We will therefore use a set
to define each class (or type) of things like nodes. Moreover, properties and relations between classes and instances
(including graph edges) will be captured through predicates
over sets. Arguments are represented using a set N of
nodes connected by binary directed edges (henceforth referred to as edges) which we define using the predicate
edge
−−−→: N ×N . We will sometimes write n1
edge
−−−→ n2 to
denote (n1, n2) ∈ edge
−−−→. A node can also have a number
of internal attributes, denoting things such as textual details,
certainty degree, acceptability status, etc.
The core AIF has two types of nodes: information nodes
(or I-nodes) and scheme nodes(or S-nodes). These are represented by two disjoint sets, NI ⊂ N and NS ⊂ N , respectively. Information nodes are used to represent passive information contained in an argument, such as a claim, premise,
data, etc. On the other hand, S-nodes capture the application
of schemes (i.e. patterns of reasoning). Such schemes may
be domain-independent patterns of reasoning, which resemble rules of inference in deductive logics but broadened to
include non-deductive inference. The schemes themselves
belong to a class, S, and are classified into the types: rule of
inference scheme, conflict scheme, and preference scheme.
We denote these using the disjoint sets SR, SC and SP , respectively. The predicate (uses : NS × S) is used to express
the fact that a particular scheme node uses (or instantiates)
a particular scheme. The AIF thus provides an ontology
for expressing schemes and instances of schemes, and constrains the latter to the domain of the former via the function
uses. I.e., that ∀n ∈ NS, ∃s ∈ S such that uses(n, s).
The present ontology deals with three different types of
scheme nodes, namely rule of inference application nodes
(or RA-nodes), preference application nodes (or PA-nodes)
and conflict application nodes (or CA-nodes). These are represented as three disjoint sets: N RA
S ⊆ NS, N P A
S ⊆ NS,
and N CA
S ⊆ NS, respectively. The word ‘application’ on
each of these types was introduced in the AIF as a reminder
that these nodes function as instances, not classes, of possibly generic inference rules. Intuitively, N RA
S captures nodes
that represent (possibly non-deductive) rules of inference,
N CA
S captures applications of criteria (declarative specifications) defining conflict (e.g. among a proposition and its
negation, etc.), and N P A
S are applications of (possibly abstract) criteria of preference among evaluated nodes.
The AIF core specification does not type its edges. Instead, semantics for edges can be inferred when necessary
from the types of nodes they connect. The informal semantics of edges are listed in Table 1. One of the restrictions
imposed by the AIF is that no outgoing edge from an I-node
can be directed directly to another I-node. This ensures that
the type of any relationship between two pieces of information must be specified explicitly via an intermediate S-node.
1447
to I-node to RA-node to PA-node to CA-node
from Inode
I-node data used
in applying an
inference
I-node data used
in applying a
preference
I-node data in conflict with information in node supported by CA-node
from
RAnode
inferring a
conclusion
in the form
of a claim
inferring a
conclusion in the
form of an
inference
application
inferring a
conclusion in the
form of a
preference
application
inferring a conclusion in the form of
a conflict definition
application
from
PAnode
applying a
preference
over data in
I-node
applying a
preference over
inference
application in
RA-node
metapreferences:
applying a
preference over
preference
application in
supported
PA-node
preference application in supporting
PA-node in conflict
with preference
application in PAnode supported by
CA-node
from
CAnode
applying
conflict
definition to
data in
I-node
applying conflict
definition to
inference
application in
RA-node
applying conflict
definition to
preference
application in
PA-node
showing a conflict
holds between a
conflict definition
and some other
piece of information
Table 1: Informal semantics of untyped edges in core AIF
Definition 1 (Argument Network)
An argument network Φ is a graph consisting of:
– a set N of vertices (or nodes); and
– a binary relation edge
−−−→: N ×N representing edges.
such that (i, j) ∈ edge
−−−→ where both i ∈ NI and j ∈ NI
A simple argument can be represented by linking a set of
premises to a conclusion via a particular scheme. Formally:
Definition 2 (Simple Argument)
A simple argument in network Φ is a tuple P, τ, c	 where:
– P ⊆ NI is a set of nodes denoting premises;
– τ ∈ N RA
S is a rule of inference application node; and
– c ∈ NI is a node denoting the conclusion;
such that τ edge
−−−→ c, uses(τ,s) where s ∈ S, and ∀p ∈ P we
have p
edge
−−−→ τ .
Following is a description of a simple argument in propositional logic, depicted graphically in Figure 1(a). We distinguish S-nodes from I-nodes graphically by drawing the
former with a slightly thicker border.
Example 1 (Simple Argument)
The tuple A1 = {p, p → q}, MP1, q	 is a simple argument in propositional language L, where p ∈ NI and
(p → q) ∈ NI are nodes representing premises, and q ∈ NI
is a node representing the conclusion. In between them,
the node MP1 ∈ N RA
S is a rule of inference application
nodes (i.e., RA-node) that uses the modus ponens natural
deduction scheme, which can be formally written as follows:
uses(MP1, ∀A, B ∈ L A A→B
B ).
An attack or conflict from one information or scheme node
to another information or scheme node is captured through a
CA-node, which captures the type of conflict. The attacker
is linked to the CA-node, and the CA-node is subsequently
linked to the attacked node. Note that since edges are directed, each CA-node captures attack in one direction. Symmetric attack would require two CA-nodes, one in each direction. The following example describes a conflict, shown
graphically in Figure 1(b), between two simple arguments.
Figure 1: Examples of simple arguments
Example 2 (Conflict among Simple Arguments)
Recall the simple argument A1 = {p, p → q}, MP1, q	.
And consider another simple argument A2 = {r, r →
¬p}, MP2,¬p	. Argument A2 undermines A1 by supporting the negation of the latter’s premise. This (symmetric)
propositional conflict is captured through two CA-nodes labelled neg1 and neg2 .
Extending the Core AIF: Argument Schemes
Argumentation schemes are forms of argument, representing stereotypical ways of drawing inferences from particular
patterns of premises and conclusions. Schemes help categorise the way arguments are built. Among others, Walton’s
taxonomy (Walton 1996) has has been most influential in
computational work. Each Walton scheme type has a name,
conclusion, set of premises and a set of critical questions
bound to this scheme. A common example of Walton-style
schemes is the Argument from Expert Opinion:
– Premise: Source E is an expert in the subject domain S.
– Premise: E asserts that A, in domain S, is true.
– Conclusion: A may plausibly be taken to be true.
Many other schemes were presented by Walton (Walton
1996), such as argument from consequence, and argument
from analogy. One can then identify instances that instantiate the scheme, such as the following example argument:
Example 3 (Instance of Argument from Expert Opinion)
– Premise: Allen is an expert in sport.
– Premise: Allen says that Brazil has the best football team.
– Conclusion: Brazil has the best football team.
Critical questions serve to inspect arguments based on this
scheme. For example, in the canonical scheme for “Argument from expert opinion,” there are six critical questions:
1. Expertise Question: How credible is expert E?
2. Field Question: Is E an expert in the field that the assertion, A, is in?
3. Opinion Question: Does E’s testimony imply A?
4. Trustworthiness Question: Is E reliable?
5. Consistency Question: Is A consistent with the testimony
of other experts?
6. Backup Evidence Question: Is A supported by evidence?
1448
As discussed by Gordon & Walton in the Carneades model
(Gordon & Walton 2006), these questions are not all alike.
The first, second, third and sixth questions refer to presumptions required for the inference to go through (e.g., the critical question ‘How credible is expert E as an expert source?’
questions a presumption by the proponent that ‘Expert E is
credible’). The proponent of the argument retains the burden of proof if these questions are asked. Numbers four
and five, however, shift the burden of proof to the questioner
(e.g., the opponent must demonstrate that another expert disagrees with E). These questions capture exceptions to the
rule, and correspond to Toulmin’s rebuttal (Toulmin 1958).
Recall that in Example 1, we represented the rule of inference application in an RA-node labelled MP1, and stated
explicitly that it uses the modus ponens generic natural deduction rule. It would therefore seem natural to use the
same approach with presumptive schemes. However, this
approach loses the information about the generic structure
of the scheme, as well as the explicit relationship between
an actual premise and the generic form (or descriptor) it
instantiates (e.g. that premise ‘Allen is an expert in sport’
instantiates the generic form ‘Source E is an expert in the
subject domain S’). To this end, we propose capturing the
structure of the scheme explicitly in the argument network.
We consider the set of schemes S as nodes in the argument network. And we introduce a new class of nodes,
called forms (or F-nodes), captured in the set NF ⊆ N .
Two distinct types of forms are presented: premise descriptors and conclusion descriptors, denoted by N Prem
F ⊆ NF
and N Conc
F ⊆ NF , respectively. As can be seen in Figure 2,
we can now explicitly link each node in the actual argument
(the four unshaded nodes at the bottom right) to the form
node it instantiates (the four shaded nodes at the top right).3
Notice that here, we expressed the predicate ‘uses’ with the
edge fulfilsScheme
−−−−−−−−→: NS × S.
Since each critical question corresponds either to a presumption or an exception, we provide explicit descriptions
of the presumptions and exceptions associated with each
scheme. To express the scheme’s presumptions, we add a
new type of F-node called presumption, represented by the
set N Pres
F ⊆ NF , and linked to the scheme via a new edge
type hasPresumption
−−−−−−−−−−→: S×N Pres
F . This is shown in the three
(shaded) presumption nodes at the bottom left of Figure 2.
As for representing exceptions, the AIF offers a more expressive possibility. In just the same way that stereotypical
patterns of the passage of deductive, inductive and presumptive inference can be captured as rule of inference schemes,
so too can the stereotypical ways of characterising conflict
be captured as conflict schemes. Conflict, like inference,
has some patterns that are reminiscent of deduction in their
absolutism (such as the conflict between a proposition and
its complement), as well as others that are reminiscent of
non-deductive inference in their heuristic nature (such as the
conflict between two courses of action with incompatible resource allocations). By providing a way to attack an argu3
To improve readability, we will start using typed edges, which
will enable us to explicitly distinguish between the different types
of connections between nodes. All typed edges will take the form
type
−−−→, where type is the type of edge, and type
−−−→⊆ edge
−−−→.
mentation scheme, exceptions can most accurately be presented as conflict scheme descriptions (as shown in the top
left of Figure 2).
Note that now, there is no longer any need to represent
critical questions directly in the network, since they are easily inferable from the presumptions and exceptions, viz., for
every presumption or exception x, that scheme can be said
to have a critical question ‘Is it the case that x?’
Finally, in Walton’s account of schemes, some presumptions may be implicitly or explicitly entailed by a premise.
For example, the premise ‘Source E is an expert in subject
domain D’ entails the presumption that ‘E is an expert in the
field that A is in.’ While the truth of a premise may be questioned directly, questioning associated with the underlying
presumptions can be more specific, capturing the nuances
expressed in Walton’s characterisation. This relationship,
between some premises and presumptions, can be captured
explicitly using a predicate ( entails
−−−−→: N Prem
F × N Pres
F ).
Definition 3 (Presumptive Inference Scheme Description)
A presumptive inference scheme description is a tuple
PD, α, cd, Ψ, Γ, entails
−−−−→	 where:
– PD ⊆ N Prem
F is a set of premise descriptors;
– α ∈ SR is the scheme;
– cd ∈ N Conc
F is a conclusion descriptor.
– Ψ ⊆ N Pres
F is a set of presumption descriptors;
– Γ ⊆ SC is a set of exceptions; and
– entails
−−−−→⊆ N Prem
F × N Pres
F
such that:
– α
hasConcDesc
−−−−−−−−→ cd;
– ∀pd ∈ PD we have α
hasPremiseDesc
−−−−−−−−−−→ pd;
– ∀ψ ∈ Ψ we have α
hasPresumption
−−−−−−−−−−→ ψ;
– ∀γ ∈ Γ we have α
hasException
−−−−−−−−→ γ;
With the description of the scheme in place, we can now
show how argument structures can be linked to scheme
structures. In particular, we define a presumptive argument,
which is an extension of the definition of a simple argument.
Definition 4 (Presumptive Argument)
A presumptive argument based on presumptive inference
scheme description PD, α, cd, Ψ, Γ, entails
−−−−→	 is a tuple
P, τ, c	 where:
– P ⊆ NI is a set of nodes denoting premises;
– τ ∈ N RA
S is a rule of inference application node; and
– c ∈ NI is a node denoting the conclusion;
such that:
– τ edge
−−−→ c; uses(τ,α);
– ∀p ∈ P we have p
edge
−−−→ τ ;
– τ fulfilsScheme
−−−−−−−−→ α;
– c
fulfilsConclusionDesc
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→ cd; and
– fulfilsPremiseDesc
−−−−−−−−−−−−→⊆ P × PD corresponds to a bijection
(i.e. one-to-one correspondence) from P to PD.
1449
Figure 2: An argument network showing an argument from
expert opinion, two counter-arguments undermining a presumption and an exception, and the descriptions of the
schemes used by the argument and attackers. A: Brazil has
the best football team: Allen is a sports expert and he says
so; B: But Allen is biased, and he is not an expert in sports!
ArgDF: A Semantic Web System for
Authoring and Navigating Arguments
We implemented our extended ontology using RDF and
RDFS,4 and call the resulting ontology AIF-RDF. In summary, we view elements of arguments and schemes (e.g.
premises, conclusions) as RDF resources, and connect them
using binary predicates as described earlier.
ArgDF5 is a Semantic Web-based system built on the top
of the AIF-RDF ontology. It uses a variety of software components such as the Sesame RDF repository,6 PHP scripting,
XSLT, the Apache Tomcat server,7 and MySQL database.
The system also uses Phesame,8 a PHP class containing a set
of functions for communicating with Sesame through PHP
pages. The Sesame RDF repository offers the central fea4
The Resource Description Framework (RDF) is an XMLbased language for making statements about resources. Each resource has a Universal Resource Identifier (URI). A statement is
a subject-predicate-object expression, sometimes called a triple.
The predicate captures a relationship between the subject (a resource) and the object (another resource, or a literal). RDF Schema
(RDFS) (Brickley & Guha 2004) is a Semantic Web ontology language. It provides constructs for specifying classes and class hierarchies, properties (or predicates) and property hierarchies, restrictions on the domains and ranges of properties, etc. RDFS
specifications are themselves RDF statements. For example, the
triple (I-Node, rdfs:subClassOf, Node) specifies that
‘I-Node’ is a sub-class of ‘Node.’ 5
ArgDF is currently a proof-of-concept prototype and can be
accessed at: http://www.argdf.org 6
See: http://www.openrdf.org 7
See: http://tomcat.apache.org/ 8
http://www.hjournal.org/phesame
tures needed by the system, namely: (i) uploading RDF and
RDFS single statements or complete files; (ii) deleting RDF
statements; (iii) querying the repository using the Semantic
Web query language RQL; and (iv) returning RDF query results in a variety of computer processable formats including
XML, HTML or RDF.
Creating New Arguments: The system presents the
available schemes, and allows the user to choose the scheme
to which the argument belongs. Details of the selected
scheme are then retrieved from the repository, and the form
of the argument is displayed to the user, who then creates
the conclusion followed by the premises.
Support/Attack of Existing Expressions: The list of
existing expressions (i.e. premises or conclusions) in the
repository can be displayed. The user can choose an expression to support or attack. When a user chooses to support an existing premise through a new argument/scheme,
this premise will be both a premise in one argument, and a
conclusion in another. Thus, the system enables argument
chaining. If the user chooses to attack an expression, on
the other hand, s/he will be redirected to choose an appropriate conflict scheme, and create a new argument whose
conclusion is linked to the existing conclusion via a conflict
application node (as in Example 2).
Searching through Arguments: The system also enables users to search existing arguments, by specifying text
found in the premises or the conclusion, the type of relationship between these two (i.e. support or attack), and the
scheme(s) used. For example, one can search for arguments,
based on expert opinion, against the ‘war on Iraq,’ and mentioning ‘weapons of mass destruction’ in their premises. In
the background, the system construct an RQL query which
is then submitted to the RDF repository.
Linking Existing Premises to a New Argument: While
creating premises supporting a given conclusion through a
new argument, the user can re-use existing premises from
the system. This premise thus contributes to multiple arguments in a divergent structure. This functionality can be
useful, for example, in Web-based applications that allow
users to use existing Web content (e.g. a news article, a legal document) to support new or existing claims.
Attacking Arguments through Implicit Assumptions:
With our account of presumptions and exceptions, it becomes possible to construct an automatic mechanism for
presuming. ArgDF allows the user to inspect an existing
argument, allowing the exploration of the hidden assumptions (i.e. presumptions and exceptions) by which its inference is warranted. This leads the way for possible implicit
attacks on the argument through pointing out an exception,
or through undermining one of its presumptions (as shown
in Figure 2). This is exactly the role that Walton envisaged
for his critical questions (Walton 1996). Thus, ArgDF exploits knowledge about implicit assumptions in order to enable richer interaction between the user and the arguments.
Creation of New Schemes: The user can create new
schemes through the interface of ArgDF without having to
modify the ontology.9 This feature enables a variety of usercreated schemes to be incorporated, thus offering flexibility
not found in any other argument-support system.
9
Recall that actual schemes are instances of the “Scheme” class.
1450
Conclusions and Future Possibilities
As tools for electronic argumentation grow in sophistication,
number and popularity, so the role for the AIF and its implementations will become more important. What this paper
has done is to sketch where this trend takes us – the World
Wide Argument Web – and to describe some of the technical components that will support it, building on a foundation
of Walton’s theory, the AIF and the Semantic Web. Earlier
in the paper, we introduced desiderata necessary for the creation of a WWAW and we conclude here by revisiting them.
1. The WWAW must support the storage, creation, update
and querying of argumentative structures: ArgDF is a
Web-based system that supports the storage, creation, update and querying of argument data structures based on
Walton’s argument schemes. Though the prototype implementation employs a centralised server, the model can
support large-scale distribution.
2. The WWAW must have Web-accessible repositories: Arguments are uploaded on an RDF repository which can
be accessed and queried openly through the Web and using a variety of standard RDF query languages.
3. The WWAW language must be based on open standards,
enabling collaborative development of new tools: Arguments in ArgDF are annotated in RDF using RDFS ontologies, both open standards endorsed by the W3C.
4. The WWAW must employ a unified, extensible argumentation ontology: Our ontology captures the main concepts
in the Argument Interchange Format ontology (Chesnevar ˜
et al. 2007), which is the most current general ontology
for describing arguments and argument networks.
5. The WWAW must support the representation, annotation
and creation of arguments using a variety of argumentation schemes: AIF-RDF preserves the AIF’s strong emphasis on scheme-based reasoning patterns, conflict patterns and preference patterns, and is designed specifically
to accommodate extended and modified scheme sets.
AIF represents a first step towards an open mechanism for
representing arguments, but the high level of abstraction that
was demanded of it also presents challenges to developers’
abilities to use it. AIF-RDF bridges this gap between the ontological abstraction and the code-level detail. ArgDF then
demonstrates the flexibility that AIF-RDF affords, and offers an example of rapid tool development on the basis of
theoretical advances in the understanding of argument structure. Following are some potential usage scenarios that may
exploit the infrastructure presented here.
Question Answering: One extension of the current system
is to exploit the variety of Semantic Web techniques for improving question answering (McGuinness 2004). Prospects
range from using query refinement techniques to interactively assist users find arguments of interest through Webbased forms, to processing natural language questions to
generate queries. This functionality would require annotations of a large amount content on the Web. Translating the
ontology to more expressive Semantic Web ontology languages such as OWL (McGuinness & van Harmelen 2004)
can also enable ontological reasoning over argument structures, for example, to automatically classify arguments, or
to identify semantic similarities among them.
Interface and argument visualisation: ArgDF provides
only rudimentary displays. More intuitive argument visualisation is needed for the WWAW to appeal to non-experts.
Argumentative Blogging: Another potential extension is
combining our framework with so-called Semantic Blogging
tools (Cayzer 2004), to enable users to annotate their blog
entries as argument structures for others to search, and to
blog in response to one another’s arguments. This can potentially help build up large amounts of annotations, making
the question answering scenario above more viable.
Mass-collaborative argument editing: Accumulating argument annotations can be done through mass-collaborative
editing of semantically connected argumentative documents
in the style of Semantic Wikipedia (Volkel ¨ et al. 2006). A
basic feature of this kind is already offered by Discourse DB.
References
Brickley, D., and Guha, R. V. 2004. RDF vocabulary description language 1.0: RDF Schema. W3C Recommendation REC-rdf-schema-20040210, W3C.
Cayzer, S. 2004. Semantic blogging and decentralized
knowledge management. Communications of the ACM
47(12):47–52.
Chesnevar, C. I.; McGinnis, J.; Modgil, S.; Rahwan, I.; ˜
Reed, C.; Simari, G.; South, M.; Vreeswijk, G.; and Willmott, S. 2007. Towards an argument interchange format.
The Knowledge Engineering Review 21(4):293–316.
Davies, T.; O’Connor, B.; Cochran, A. A.; and Effrat, J. J.
2004. An online environment for democratic deliberation:
Motivations, principles, and design. Working paper, Symbolic Systems Program, Stanford University.
Gordon, T. F., and Walton, D. 2006. The Carneades argumentation framework. In Proc. 1st Intl. Conf. on Computational Models of Argument, 195–207. IOS Press.
Kirschner, P. A.; Shum, S. J. B.; and Carr, C. S., eds. 2003.
Visualizing Argumentation: Software Tools for Collaborative and Educational Sense-Making. London: Springer.
McGuinness, D. L., and van Harmelen, F. 2004. OWL
web ontology language overview. W3C Recommendation
REC-owl-features-20040210, W3C.
McGuinness, D. L. 2004. Question answering on the Semantic Web. IEEE Intelligent Systems 19(1):82–85.
Rowe, G. W. A.; Reed, C. A.; and Katzav, J. 2003. Araucaria: Marking up argument. In European Conference on
Computing and Philosophy.
Toulmin, S. 1958. The Uses of Argument. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Verheij, B. 2003. Artificial argument assistants for defeasible argumentation. Artificial Intelligence 150(1-2):291–
324.
Volkel, M.; Kr ¨ otzsch, M.; Vrandecic, D.; Haller, H.; and ¨
Studer, R. 2006. Semantic wikipedia. In Proc. WWW 2006,
Edinburgh, UK, 585–594. ACM Press.
Walton, D. N. 1996. Argumentation Schemes for Presumptive Reasoning. Mahwah NJ, USA: Erlbaum.
1451