WILFRID SELLARS’ THEORY OF PROBABILITY
Joseph C. Pitt
December 17, 1975
B-6
445
Abstract:
Wilfrid Sellars attempts to deflect traditional objections
to the straight rule of inductive acceptance by embedding it
in a complicated system of levels. This system rests on a
theory of probability in which the meaning of "probable" is
reconstructed in the context of Sellars' general theory of
practical reason. To say a statement is probable means, according to Sellars, that there is good reason for accepting
the statement as true. In this paper I examine Sellars'
attempt to resuscitate the straight rule and conclude that
not only does he fail, but his account of "probable" is circular .
446
B-7
Wilfrid Sellars' Theory of Probability
Justification, Probability and Acceptance
Why and in what circumstances
statements derivable from some g
ises? There is no problem where
concerned. Given a sound dérivât
conclusion of the argument is ju
ance of the rules governing dedutb
should we accept as true
fven set of acceptable premdeductive derivations are
ion, our acceptance of the
^tified by our prior accepttive arguments.
For what reasons do we accept the conclusions of arguments
which are probabilistic? Sellars suggests that we start by
seriously adopting the common sense meaning of 'probable' as
'there are good reasons'. He develops this theme by considering different types of good reasons, resulting in a proliferation of distinctions. There turn out to be at least
three different modes of probability.
respect to any given probability
different types of 'outcomes'
Furthermore, with
argument there are three
]3ut despite the complexity
of the theory two major points stand out: (a) Sellars' inductive rule of acceptance for empirical generalizations is
the straight rule; (b) the claim that we should use a straight
rule of inductive acceptance in probability arguments becomes
a premise in a practical argument with the conclusion that we
should in fact accept that-p, where 'that-p' constitutes the
conclusion proper of a probability argument.
The crucial problem with this
the reasons for using the straig
lars' argument is that the policy
descriptions which are 'probable
condition to obtain frameworks w!
the obtaining of such frameworks
inquiry. Having such frameworks
by we can "give nontrivial expia:
laws. " 1 ('Laws' here refers to
We accept statements which are p
ing so will lead to a framework
tions, explanations and predicti
W. Sellars, "Induction as Vin
1964, p. 198. Hereafter all ref|e
work.
account arises in terms of
ht rule. The drift of Selof continued acceptance of
puts us in the best possible
hich are 'probable', and that
is the objective of scientific
puts us in the position wherenatory accounts of established
empirical generalizations.)
robable on the hope that dowhich produces good descripons.
dication", Philosophy of Science,
rences to Sellars are to this
447
B-8
Between the stages of adopting theories and generalizations
lies a point at which we adopt rules of inference. Sellars
deems it reasonable to espouse a principle of inference if no
evidence indicates its espousal will produce falsehoods. Postulating an order of dependence among the different modes of
probability, Sellars argues that the probability of theories
depends on the probability of rules of inference, what he
calls 'nomological probability.' He makes a number of interesting points about the relation between evidence and statements.
First, claiming a given proposition is probable is not to assert that it stands in a given relation to a certain body of
evidence. It is, rather, to report that the statement has
good reasons for being adopted. In this sense, then a probability claim is an appraisal. Second, we accept rules of
inference, not empirical claims, when we adopt the conclusion
of a nomological probability argument. That is, we do not
adopt the conclusions of the probability argument and then
proceed to make predictions and offer explanations using it.
Rather we use the conclusion of probability arguments in the
postulation of rules of inference.
To rationally accept the conclusion of an argument requires
a rule of acceptance. Sellars does not believe that there are
any rules of acceptance for non-deductive arguments. In Sellers' account of logic, to call a method of reasoning a logic
means that there is a criterion of soundness for those arguments. Thus, if an argument is sound there is no reason not
to accept its conclusion, since it is true. Implicit here is
the idea that the only viable rule of acceptance is one that
says we ought to accept true statements. To the extent that
arguments cannot be guaranteed to produce true conclusions,
given true premises, their conclusions should not be accepted
as true. If we weaken the requirement that the conclusion be
true to require merely that it have a high probability, then
the problem arises as to how high a probability is sufficient.
And, because we can show that any number less than one on a
probability scale is insufficient to warrant the acceptability
of the argument, we are forced to abandon the idea that the
conclusion per se of a probability argument is acceptable.
To avoid this type of problem Sellars claims that we do
not accept the conclusions of probability arguments. Rather,
we use them to formulate rules of inference. The rule of inference notes that given that a certain state of affairs occurs under a given set of circumstances x per cent of the
time, we ought to infer that the probability that there is an
x chance of that state of affairs occurring the next time
that set of circumstances obtains. Taking this line does not
lead us to such problems as the lottery paradox.
In his discussion of nomological probability Sellars also
answers the question as to which material rules of inference
448
B-9
we should accept. We should accept those which represent
the facts. That is, we ought to accept those rules which
have worked in the past. This amounts to claiming that our
ordinary day to day inferences can be vindicated if on the
basis of these inferences we come to develop laws and theories which do not permit us to make unsound inferences.
This, in turn, says that what works is what we have and if
we have it then it's justified, all of which in turn sounds
very much like it begs the issue of justification.
A theory of justification tells us what we ought to do in
order to give good reasons for accepting or rejecting theories,
laws, etc. But to say that "you ought to act in accordance
with the facts" seems to miss the point, since, to paraphrase
Goodman, the facts are where you find them, depending on the
tools, i.e., theories, you are using. It is, at best, only
a necessary and not a sufficient condition for accepting a
rule of inference that the world has in the past in fact
looked the way the rule says it should. To put this in
slightly different terms, Sellars does not manage to counter
Hume and Goodman's classic observation that even if things
have appeared ever so regular in the past we cannot assume
they will continue to be so regular in the future. This is
a strong claim and needs to be defended. In what follows I
attempt to demonstrate that Sellars' solution to the justification problem fails.
The Meaning of "Probable"
In the basic non-metrical sense of "probable" (in
relation which all other senses are to be understood), to say of a statement or proposition that
it is probable is, in first approximation, to say
that it is worthy of credence, that is, to put it
in a way which points toward a finer grained analysis, it is to say that relevant things considered
there is good reason to accept it. (p. 198)
In the finer grained analysis to which Sellars alludes he
distinguishes two different types of arguments and three
different outcomes of these arguments. The state of accepting the proposition in question constitutes the 'terminal
outcome.' The remaining two outcomes, the proximate and the
practical, are the respective proper conclusions of a probability argument and a practical argument.
Statements are probable. But there are different kinds of
statements, e.g. laws and theories (which in this context
Sellars views as a conjunction of the principles of a theory).
With respect to each of these kinds there corresponds a mode
of probability. There is a different set of good reasons,
B-10
449
or a different type of reasoning by which the good reasons
are supplied, for accepting different types of statements.
A probability statement is the conclusion of a probability
argument; and "there are clearly such things as "probability
arguments" where this simply means an argument of which the
conclusion is a probability statement, i.e., a statement to
the effect that a certain other statement or proposition is
probable".(p. 199) At this point, however, we must be careful. The mere recognition of probability arguments does not
commit Sellars to treating probability in anything like a
traditional manner. And he takes pains to offer a warning on
just this point. To admit probability arguments, "involves
no commitment concerning either the form of the argument or
the form of the conclusion." (p. 199) A similar warning
emerges when he first introduces his three outcomes:
I distinguish between the "proximate," the "practical"
and the "terminal" outcomes of what I shall call firstorder probability arguments. My reason for using the
expression 'outcome' rather than 'conclusion' (which
might seem a more appropriate way of characterizing
the terminus ad quern of an argument or inference) is
that although the whole point of a first order probability argument is to generate a terminal outcome,
the relation between a terminal outcome, and the
premises of the argument is radically different from
that which obtains between what we ordinarily call
the conclusion of an argument and its premises.
(p. 199)
A practical outcome constitutes the terminus ad quern of a
practical argument and a proximate outcome the terminus ad
quern of a probability argument. The relation between these
two types of argument is complicated, but essential to Sellars'
entire program.
15. That there must be a practical outcome of a first
order probability argument is an immediate consequence of our tentative analysis of probability
statements. For if
it is probable that-p
has anything like the sense of
relevant things considered, it is reasonable
to accept that-p
then it tells us that
there is a good argument which takes relevant
450
B - l l
things into account and has as its conclusion shall accept that-p
that is to say, it points toward an argument which
can be schematically represented as
therefore, I shall accept that-p
16. Reflection on the above makes it clear that on
the view I am proposing there are at least two
arguments in the logical neighborhood of every
probability statement.
(a) the first order probability reasoning,
yet to be explored, which can be schematized
therefore, it is probable that-£
(b) the practical reasoning schematized
above as
therefore, I shall accept that-p
the important thing to note is that of these two
reasonings, the former, although it is what I
am calling a first order probability argument,
stands to the latter, roughly, as meta-argument
to object-argument. More accurately, the conclusion of the former asserts that the premises are
available for a good and valid argument of one
or other of a number of patterns of which the
conclusion is the conclusion of the reasoning
schematized in (b). (p. 2 0 1 )
A probability argument stands to the practical argument as
meta-argument to object-argument. Thus, some of the premises
used in the probability argument can be used in the practical
argument. But there is more involved here than meets the eye.
The practical argument is itself suggested by the conclusion
of the probability argument (hence, indirectly by the entire
argument) because the conclusion, being a probability statement, says there is such a practical argument which can be
constructed. But such a view leads to problems. Specifically,
the use of a practical argument leading to the conclusion
B-12
451
therefore, I shall accept that-p
is unnecessary. To see this consider just this one point;
where there is a probability argument there is a practical
argument in its logical neighborhood leading to the conclusion that the conclusion of the probability argument should
be accepted as true. This seems to be the case for any probability argument. If so, why bother with all the complications of logical neighborhoods? Let us merely institute an
urban renewal project and sweep away the slums leaving simple
probability arguments. Since we now all know the meaning of
"probable" is "there are good reasons to accept," then whenever we can produce a probability argument we can accept its
conclusion. Thus we can accept anything at all since we can
always produce an argument giving a certain conclusion some
probability or other.
At this point it is not enough to counter that Sellars
claims not merely that there is an argument with a practical
outcome, but there are good reasons for accepting the conclusion. For this merely begs the issue. Since the very purpose
of science is supposedly to produce better explanations and
that you need to be guided not by a vague notion of "good"
reasons which reasons could change as the direction of wind
does as in a Jamesian Pragmatism, but by some specific end
in view.
Sellars is sensitive to this point for he argues that it is
not possible to construct a practical argument on the basis of
a probability argument in all cases. The constructability of
a practical argument is not obvious from the schematic account
of a first order probability argument because it is incomplete
. . . the real reason why
it is probable that-p
is "incomplete" is that it points to a practical argument
which it doesn't enable one to construct. Moreover,
the reason why what I shall call the 'second order probability statement'
e-Rj (that-p, e) implies that it is probable that-p,
the reason is, that it enables the construction of
certain crucial features of the practical argument
in question. Thus it enables construction of practical
arguments of the following form
452
B-13
a
(that-p, that-q)
therefore, I shall accept that-p. (p. 203)
The second order probability statement, therefore, is complete because it allows us to construct key features of the
corresponding practical argument, features we are unable to
produce for the case of first order probability arguments.
These key features are (1) the evidence for the claim that-£,
and (2 ) the relation that obtains between that-p and its evidence. In the example given '£' denotes the evidence, ’that-p'
the statement asserting the evidence, and 'RL ' the logical relation claimed to hold between q and that-p.—
In the schematic version of a second order probability
statement noted above, 'e' refers to the total relevant
evidence. Sellars provides no criterion of relevancy, but
it is not a crucial point for this discussion. Needless to
say, spelling out the relevance requirement raises a troublesome issue wherever it appears. Speaking to the total relevant
evidence question in a footnote, Sellars notes:
In these formulations from now on I shall leave implicit the requirement that e be the total relevant
evidence or grounds on which that-£ is probable. I
shall absorb this requirement into the symbol 'R '
in the sense that (a) I shall limit my discus- —
sion to pure cases of the different modes of probability, there being only one R. in each pure case;
(b) I shall assume that each —pure case RL obtains
between that-£ and all the evidence (or, — more
generally, grounds) appropriate to the particular
example of that pure mode. (p. 203)
Thus, while there is a logical relation between the evidence
and the statement in question, 'probable' does not name that
relation. This does not entail that 'probable' does not name
any logical relation. In the context of 'it is probable that-£'
'probable' means, "there is a good argument of one or other of
certain patterns for accepting that-£. " (p. 202) The distinction between different levels of probability arguments at this
point serves as a way of marking out those probability arguments which are complete from probability statements where the
concept occurs in the non-metrical sense originally noted.
But if we look a little closer we can see that there is not
really an argument here defending the claim that a first order
probability argument is essentially incomplete and that it is
B-14
453
reasonable to continue to support the levels view of probability. It rests on the claim that the second order probability argument supplies the key ingredient permitting the
construction of a practical argument leading to the acceptance of that-£. This item if 'R^'. That is, a second order
probability argument is complete— because it mentions the
logical relationship holding between e and that-p. Mention
of this relation permits constructing a practical argument
leading to the conclusion
I shall accept that-p
because, given it, we know what the major premise of the practical argument must be:
Accept conclusions of those arguments establishing
between that-q and that-p.
Now since no such item as 'R^' appears in a first order probability argument we can't construct a practical argument leading to the acceptance of its conclusion. This leaves us to
conclude either that first order probability arguments aren't
really probability arguments or that Sellars has no legitimate
way out of concluding that we can accept the conclusion of any
first order probability argument we can construct.
If we take Sellars' account of 'probable' seriously we are
forced to conclude that not all probability arguments are probability arguments. To claim that a statement is probable is
to claim there are good reasons for accepting it. Since for
first order probability arguments there are no good reasons
available for accepting their conclusions we seem compelled
to conclude that they must be probability arguments. But, it
might be argued, there is a difference between claiming that
there are good reasons for accepting a conclusion and that
there is an argument with the conclusion that you should accept a certain conclusion. Indeed there is such a difference,
but it doesn't help Sellars here. For by asserting that a
first order probability argument is essentially incomplete he
is effectively claiming that no practical argument leading to
the conclusion that the outcome of the probability argument
should be accepted can be constructed, i.e. there are no good
reasons for accepting that-p. If that is so then how can
it is probable that-p
be a meaningful claim?
On the other hand, Sellars is forced to admit that we can
accept the conclusion of any first order probability argument since by definition there are good reasons for accepting
C-l
454
the conclusion, even though we can't provide them. It is
apparent that this too is an unacceptable conclusion.
'Probable' versus the Ground-Consequence Relation
Rephrasing the results of the previous section: Sellars
wants to view probability not as a relation but as an appraisal.
In a sense, however, this is too strong. While claiming there
are good reasons to accept a claim is to appraise it, when we
say of a statement that it is probable we also recognize a
relation between that statement and something else. According
to Sellars, the 'something else' denotes the practical argument which results in accepting that-p and not the evidence
for the statement.
Sellars' argument for considering probability as a special
relation consists of three parts. First, he suggests that
like 'father,' not every relation notion need mention that
which it relates. This observation serves as the basis for
his discussion of why probability should not be characterized
as a logical relation between a statement and its evidence.
Armed with these preliminaries, and his prior analysis of the
meaning of 'probable,' Sellars continues to the central point
of his theory, that probability arguments are not inductive
arguments simply put. This can be rephrased in a Sellarsian
fashion by saying that the relationship between the premises
and the conclusion in an inductive argument differs from
and should not be confused with, the relationship which obtains between a probability argument and its conclusion. The
conclusion of an inductive arugment is a statement which may
or may not be true. The outcome of a probability argument,
properly conceived, is the actual acceptance of the claim
that-|>, hence, different in kind. All of this, however, does
not mitigate the conclusion that Sellars cannot specify why
we should use 'probable' as a relation in first order probability arguments since there is no practical argument to
which it points.
Turning to the possibility that probability might be a
relation, we are confronted by a truly first class piece of
Sellarsian dialectical reasoning. Starting from his claim
that statements are probable, Sellars notes this assertion
might lead someone to interpret him as making probability an
intrinsic property of statements. He denies he intends this.
Proceeding then on the course which an imaginary critic might
take: if probability is not an intrinsic quality of some statement, then it must be a relation. And now we are on the dialectical road.
Sellars first calls this last move a non-sequitur, if what
the critic means by 'relation' amounts to something like simple
C-2
455
two-placed predicates.
If we put the above by saying that probability is a
'property of propositions,' we run the danger of being interpreted to mean that probability is an "intrensic" characteristic of propositions, something
they could have regardless of what else was the case.
Since the latter is obviously absurd, the conclusion
is often drawn that probability must be a relation.
That this is a non-sequitur appears immediately one
takes into account the existence of generalized relational properties. Thus compare
(1) Tom begot John
(2) (Ex) Tom begot x
(3) Tom is a father
It would be an egregious blunder to say that 'father'
in (3) is a relation word, a two-place predicate.
Yet is would be equally mistaken to infer from this
that Tom's being a father is logically independent
of the existence of someting to which Tom stands in
the relation expressed by '. . . begot . . .' or
'. . .is the father of . . .'. But more of this
later when we attempt to determine just what kind of
relational property probability is. (pp. 198-199)
Probability is a relation of some kind; now to determine the
nature of this relational property.
Sellars claims we can deny probability is an intrinsic
property of propositions and still not be forced to characterize it as a relation. But he has not thereby countered the
claim that probability is nothing more than a relation. A
probability statement here becomes merely a shorthand account
of a statement which specifies the evidence for the claim
and the relation in which the claim stands in that evidence.
Insisting that a full explication of 'probable' requires
articulating the evidence, e, for a claim, £, and the relation between e and p, leads, he says, to a vicious circularity.
If 'p is probable' specifies a relation between £ and its
evidence, then the evidence implies £ to a certain degree.
And if we ask what 'implies means in this context, that is,
if we ask for the logic of inductive inference, all we get is:
"stands in a given relation to . . .".
It is sometimes said that the fact that probability is
relative to evidence requires that the conclusion of
a probability argument have the form
it is probable that-p in relation to total evidence
456
C-5
e such that Rl (that-p, e)
and that
it is probable that-p
makes sense only as an "elliptical" formulation of the
more complicated statement.This is obviously false if
intended to mean that a well formed probability statement must mention specific evidence and specify the
logical relation in which the proposition in question
stands to the evidence. On the other hand, it is indeed true that 'it is probable that-p' is in some sense
elliptical for a statement making a general reference
to the evidence and its relation to the proposition
that-p. But not, and this is the crucial point, for a
statement of the form
some state of affairs obtains such that is probable
that-p in relation to it
For if we ask "what is meant by 'in relation to'?" the
answer, if our analysis if correct, must be implies, so
that the above is equivalent to
some state of affairs obtains which implies that it
is probable that-p
and the expression of which the "ellipticality" was in
question recurs. (p. 2 0 2 )
But Sellars has already said probability is a relational property. If it does not establish this specific relation, to
what type of relation does it pertain? Let us recall that
Sellars calls 'father,' as it occurs in (3), a generalized
relational property. 'Probable' also stands for a general
relational property. This general property refers generally
to evidence and its relation to the statement in question.
It does this task of general referring not by mentioning
specific evidence but by implying there exists an argument
which has as its conclusion,
I shall accept that-p.
It entails there are good reasons, i.e. an argument for
accepting that-p, without specifying what those reasons are.
Thus
the solution of the puzzle emerges from our account of
it is probable that-p
457
as equivalent to
there is a good argument of one or other of
certain patterns for accepting that-£
According to this analysis a probability statement
is "elliptical: for a statement making a general
reference both to evidence and the relation to the
proposition that-£; but the statement for which a
probability statement is thus "elliptical" is not,
itself, a "non-elliptical" statement involving the
predicate 'probable' in two-place glory, but simply
its analysis. (p. 2 0 2 )
But, if the conclusion of a probability argument does not refer
to its factual evidence, but to the 'practical evidence',
i.e. the practical argument, for its acceptance, then how are
we to read the conclusion of probability arguments? For
one thing, Sellars argues, we are not to read them as conclusions of inductive arguments, where we would determine the
argument valid in accordance with the rules of an inductive
logic.
If my thesis, positively put, urges a distinction between two reasonings in the neighborhood of a probability statement (each of which, we shall see, is
deductive when made fully explicit), then it can also
be negatively put by urging that the approach to probability through the concept of non-demonstrative inferences— 'valid after their own kind'— of the form
e
therefore h
or perhaps
e-RL (h, e)
therefore h
or even
e-RL (h, e)
therefore probably, h
is, as I see it, to confuse the relation between the
terminal outcome of an argument pertaining to prob458
C-5
ability and its premises with the ground-consequence
relation. (pp. 2 0 1 -2 0 2 )
Probability reasoning is not a special form of inductive
reasoning. That p is probable does not mean we have a certain amount of factual evidence which we can relate to p by
the rules of some non-deductive logic. Rather, "p is
probable" means there is a good argument for accepting what
p says as true, except, as we have seen, in the case of first
order probability arguments.
Sellars does not intend this to imply there is no such
thing as inductive reasoning. Rather he objects to using the
probability calculus to reason from inductively obtained data
to a fast and firm conclusion in_ one fell swoop. Probability
reasoning entitles one to conclude that-p is true, or ought
to be believed to be true, or accepted as true. No one set
of rules entitles you to go directly from inductively obtained
data to the acceptance of p. The acceptance of p remains a
psychological phenomenon, the terminal, i.e. final, outcome
of the use of probability. But the acceptance of that-p, to
be rational, must be reasoned. Sellars locates reasoning
which licenses acceping p in a practical argument with the
conclusion
I shall accept that-p.
This constitutes the practical outcome of the probability
reasoning. It follows deductively from a set of premises just
as the proximate outcome, i.e. the conclusion, of the probability argument does. The analysis of the conclusion of the
probability argument comes to: there are good reasons to
accept the conclusion of this argument, which reasons are to
be found in another argument, one which has as its conclusion
that
I shall accept that-p.
The Purpose of Probability Arguments
Simply put, the creation of an explanatory framework constitutes the goal of all scientific and probability reasoning.
The conceptual ability to draw inferences constitutes a logically necessary condition of being in an explanatory framework, Fp. This requires rules of inference. But, while
rules of inference are a logical prerequisite to theoretical
explanation, Sellars insists the form of probability reasoning
stands out clearest with respect to the probability of theories.
Even though the structure of probability stands out clearest
with respect to theories, the probability of theories rests
C-6
459
on nomological probability. Nomological probability, in turn,^
rests on the form of reasoning to which it is logically prior,
namely the form of statistical probability involved in the compiling of data on the basis of sampling population samples.
In short, "there is a logical order of dependence among the
various modes of probability." (p. 2 2 0 )
We use the mode of probability relating to theories to put
us in a position where, with the appropriate practical argument, we can accept the theory in question. With respect to
the mode of probability resulting in the acceptance of rules
of inference, i.e. nomological probability, its use puts us
in a position to argue for a given theoretical account.
For the end-in-view in nomological induction(which
must not be confused with the mode of induction involved in the statistical or proportional syllogism
to be examined in a moment) is not the possession of
empirical truth, but the realizing of a logically
necessary condition of being in the very framework of
explanation and prediction, i.e. being able to draw
inferences concerning the unknown and give explanatory
accounts of the known. (p. 219)
When one argues on the basis of a rule of inference resulting
from a probability argument one operates within F . A rule of
inference, the product of a complicated process is not an empirical claim. This process involves a practical argument
leading to the conclusion that one should accept the rule of
inference given the results of a logically prior probability
argument, the conclusion of which is an empirical claim, i.e.
the result of an argument of the statistical or proportional
mode of probability. We therefore formulate the rules of inference on the basis of inadequate data, i.e. less than complete. Thus the possibility exists that the rule of inference
resulting from these prior calculations and patterns of reasoning may be false. A false rule of inference is one we assume
to be true and yet leads one to false conclusions. Sellars'
argument at this point sheds a bit more light on the difference
between inductive reasoning and probability arguments.
A principle of inference, whether a logical principle
in the narrower sense or a physical principle of inference
(P-implication), is known to be false if an argument 2
2
It is logically prior in order of justification, not in the
order of creation. The twist here is that Sellars is talking
about these relations as if they were comparable, when, in
fact, they belong to different contexts. The notion of logical
priority is, in this case, an issue concerning the reconstructed
finished theory.
460
C-7
made in accordance with it is known to have a true prem~
ise but a false conclusion. Suppose, now, that at a
time _t, when 3/4 of the observed cases of A have been
found to be B, I reason myself into accepting the
principle of inference
that AK1 is a finite unexamined class of As P
implies that approximately 3/4 aK^ is B
and then proceed, for a specified AK, AK^, to infer
(1) AK^ is a finite unexamined class of As
therefore approximately 3/4 AK^ is B
Suppose, however, it turns out, subsequently, at t',
that only J AK- is B. Then, of course, the premise of
(1) was true, but the conclusion false. Consequently
my inductive reasoning led me to espouse a false principle of inference. But, and this is a logical principle, inductive reasoning as we have analyzed it, can
never lead me to espouse a principle which I know to
be false at the time of espousal. For until AK^ is
examined, the principle is not known to be false, and
after aK^ is examined the principle no longer applies
to AK-^. The inductive reasoning which is (at t ' )
relevant will lead me to espouse a modified principle.
This principle, in turn, may turn out to be false,
but this fact in no way impugns the rationality of the
inductive enterprise. (pp. 218-219)
We do not impugn the rationality of the inductive enterprise
since it proceeds on the basis of true premises, e.g. that as
a matter of fact at the time, t ', the sample was in fact such
and such. If the new sample examined at _t ' ' differs proportionally from the sample examined at t ', that still does not
falsify the truth of the claim made at t/ . Thus, it is rational to infer that the future will be like the past,if in
fact what you know about the past happens to be true. As it
stands this hardly seems reasonable, as Goodman has pointed out.
Inductive reasoning, according to Sellars, is a perfectly
good method of reasoning provided it uses true premises. Moreover, both true premises and rules of inference remain the objective of using probability arguments. We formulate empirical
claims, on the grounds of a given amount of information. Then,
on the basis of these empirical claims, we argue probabilistically for rules of inference using a higher mode of reasoning.
The conjunction of a given set of these rules form the basis
of Fg , the test of which is whether or not we can make correct
inductive inferences concerning unknown phenomena. For Sellars,
our ability to make correct inductive inferences at the level
C-8
461
of proportional or statistical probability, within an F based
on inductive reasoning in the first place, vindicates tne
policy to use inductive generalization in this way.
Probability arguments are to provide us with the framework
to make the inductive inferences which are predictions and to
offer explanations. These arguments clearly differ from inductive inferences in a plebian sense. The conclusion proper
of a full probability argument, according to Sellars, is the
acceptance of a claim as true, while an empirical claim results from normal inductive inferences. When we test inductively generated empirical claims we are testing the rule
of inference which permitted the proposing of the claim in
the first place. This provides another check on our policy
to use induction.
Practical Reasoning
Given Sellars' version of the meaning of "probable," however inadequate it turns out to be, we can at least understand
the claim that "at the heart of the concept of probability is
the concept of a form of practical reasoning." (p. 204) If
"probable" means anything like "there are good reasons to
accept," and if, as Sellars reasons, the giving of good reasons
occurs in a practical argument, then we are led naturally to
the notion of practical reasoning.
I intend to only outline some of the more salient features
of Sellars' theory of practical reason. In particular, only
those parts essential to his theory of probability are considered since I am not here concerned with the concept of
practical reasoning per se. What follows is first a succinct
statement by Sellars of the key features of his theory. The
logic of the theory is then discussed, followed by a distinction between the types of inference.
(1) Let us say that utterances of the kind illustrated by 'I shall do A' and 'It shall be the case
that-p' express INTENTIONS, as utterances of the
kind illustrated by 'it is raining' express statements of propositions. Note that the intention
expressed by 'Tom shall make amends' is not Tom's
intention, but the intention of the speaker. 2
(2) One particularly important variety of intention
is the conditional contention, thus
(i) I shall do A, if p
(ii) Tom shall make amends, if he is guilty.
462
C-9
Note that the condition 'if p' is intrinsic to
the intention. This can be brought out by reformulating these intentions as
(iii) Shall (my doing A, if £)
(iv) Shall (Tom making amends if he is guilty)
(3) A particularly important variety of conditional
intention for our purposes is the general conditional intention
(v) I shall do A whenever X obtains.
A GENERAL conditional intention can be called a
policy. (p. 204)
The following simple logical principle governs the
application of these ideas: if
If (...) implies (--- )
then
[shall (...)] implies [shall (--- )].
To explicate both 'implies' and the above mentioned distinction between different types of inferences, consider again
Sellars' own statement.
Complications arise only when we take into account, as
we must, the difference between primary and dependent
implication. Let me explain.
(a) By 'implication' I mean a relation (between
propositions or intentions) which authorizes
inference.
(b) By calling the implication between P and Q
a dependent implication. I mean that it
presupposes the truth of an unmentioned proposition R (which is, however, identified
in one way or another by the context) and
which is such that the less dependent implication
P-R implies Q
obtains
(c) If we represent an independent implication
by
a • 3 _-* <|>
463
C-10
then the dependent implication which holds between a and ()>, presupposing the truth of 3 , can
be represented
a % $
It was pointed out above that
P implies Q
presupposes the truth of P and correspondingly
implies the truth of Q. The same situation obtains with respect to dependent implication, thus
the dependent arrow statement pictured above presupposes the truth of the contextually identifibale
3, and consequently implies the truth of <|>. (p. 205)
The theory of practical reason which emerges from these
points helps clarify the reasoning surrounding Sellars' concept of probability. Given the following typical practical
argument :
I shall accept a proposition if it satisfies condition
Ç
h satisfies condition C
Therefore I shall accept h
We can write it as a non-dependent implication:
'I shall accept a proposition if it satisfies C and h
satisfies C' implies 'I shall accept h'
We can also diagram the argument.
h satisfies C
I shall accept a proposition if it
satisfies C
---------------> 'I shall accept h'
The diagram exhibits the dependent implication between 'h
satisfies C' and 'I shall accept h,' and the presupposition
concerning acceptance of a proposition embedded in the major
premise. Probability arguments and practical reasoning share
a structural feature. Both
h is probable
and 'I shall accept h ' are consequents of dependent implications. To see this fully requires an analysis of probability
reasoning in probability arguments per se. That is the subject of the next section. For present purposes a brief account nevertheless is still possible.
464
C - l l
. . . 'makes,' in this context is equivalent to 'implies. ' Here again we have a dependent implication;
only this time, the implication is the principle of
a dependently valid probability argument as contrasted with the dependently valid practical argument discussed above. What, then is the valid argument, with e and R^ (h, e) as premises, which has 'h
is probable' as — its conclusion? The answer is not
far to seek, it must be something like
a proposition is probable., if it stands in RT to
a fact (h, e) — —
e is the — case
h is probable^
The desired dependent implication is
e-RL (h, e)
a proposition is probable^
if it stands in R^ to a — fact
------ ^ h is probable^' (p. 206)
The underlining of the phrase on the left hand side of the
arrow, the antecedent of the dependent conditional, indicates
that it is posited as true.
With the form of the probability argument outlined we come
to the crucial point. The principle of the dependent argument is: "A proposition is probableM is it satisfies condition C." To say a proposition or — statement is probable
means there are good reasons for accepting it. This amounts
to: "there is a good argument of kind M for accepting a proposition if it satisfies condition C." (p. 207) That is, provided that the proposition in question meets certain conditions,
we can construct an argument providing the reasons for accepting the proposition. As Sellars notes, "there is a good argument of kind M which has as its conclusion 'I shall accept a
proposition, if it satisfies condition C.'" (p. 207) There
are two further items required to clarify the rest of Sellars'
discussion. First, the condition C is not an arbitrary limit
set on the argument. The condition is designed with respect
to a given goal, the purpose behind using the argument in the
first place. We pursue a given policy in the active attempt
to achieve this goal. A policy is a general conditional intention. Thus to complete the argument we need some statement
of the policy which legitimizes the formulation of condition
C. Second, the statement of policy forms the major premise
in the complete practical argument. It is also crucial to
our discussion of the modes of probability because, according
to Sellars, we use different policies within the different
modes of probability arguments.
C-12
465
In short, the major premise of the first order probability^ argument tells us that the practical reasoning — which culminates in
I shall accept h
(where this acceptance is bound up with probability^)
has the form —
I shall bring about E
(but bringing about E implies accepting a proposition, if it satisfies condition C)
So, I shall accept a proposition, if it satisfies
condition C
h satisfies condition C
so, I shall accept h. (pp. 207-208)
Now to locate the position of the probability argument within
the general practical argument.
Let us first reconsider the similarity in question between
I shall accept h
and
h is probable^.
They are both consequents of dependent implications. As such
they point to the principles which make their respective arguments valid. In the practical argument, the principle in
question is
I shall accept h if it meets condition C.
In the probability argument, the principle is
A proposition is probable^ if it stands in R. to the
relevant facts. — —
The probability argument culminating in "h is probable^" constitutes the reason for saying "h satisfies condition C.This
statement is one of the premises in the argument culminating
in "I shall accept h." Thus, the probability argument occurs
in the context of saying that h is a matter of fact does meet
condition C.
We have already emphasized that a first level probability^ statement is a statement to the effect that
there — is available a good piece of practical reasoning of a certain kind which has as its conclusion 'I
shall accept h.' It should now be clear that a first
level probability argument . . . is a meta-practical
argument which establishes the availability of this
piece of practical reasoning. It does so by deriving
466
C-13
the existence of a good argument for accepting the
specific hypothesis in question from the existence
of a good argument for accepting any hypothesis which
satisfies the condition which the given hypothesis is
known to satisfy. (p. 207)
Now, however, the initial plausibility of Sellars' claim
that "probable" means "there are good reasons" fades. Take
the following as a concise statement of the analysis of "probable" :
Thus
h is probable^
where the subscript indicates a specific mode of probability, asserts the availability of a good argument
for 'I shall accept h', the ultimate major of which
is the intention of achieving a certain end, and the
proximate major is the appropriate intention to follow
a certain policy with respect to accepting propositions.
(p. 208)
This is surely misleading if it entails that the practical
argument in question will not be available unless, as a matter
of fact, the policy which permits its formulation is operative.
For now we would have to weaken Sellars' analysis of 'probable'
as there are good reasons. We could only conclude that iî_
there is a policy which urges accepting statements meeting
conditions of kind C, then
h is probable
suggests that a practical argument leading to the conclusion
that
I should accept h
can be constructed.
This objection, however, fails. The policy we claim is not
necessarily present is indeed present. Recall the purpose behind probability arguments: to provide the necessary logical
equipment for F . In Fg we can explain phenomena by telling
what they are and how they behave. We accomplish this
by using rules of inference. Fg remains our goal. Pursuant
to that objective we implement , subsidiary policies we believe
will bring us there. Such a subsidiary policy is the premise
in the complete practical argument cited above. This premise
Sellars calls the proximate major:
I shall accept a proposition, if it satisfies condition C.
C-14
467
Note that, according to Sellars, the general conditional intention that-(I shall bring about E ), the ultimate major,
entails this subpolicy.
Let us also recall that the modes of probability stand in
an order of logical dependence. This too will have an important bearing on the sense in which
h is probable^
does indeed have a practical argument in its logical neighborhood. But this order of dependence in which modes of probability stand creates its own problems. For the fact remains
that if you introduce levels to bring order out of chaos you
cannot ignore them when they prove difficult. Specifically,
difficulty arises because there are severe problems with
Sellars' account of 'probable' for first order probability
arguments. If the general conditional policy entails subpolicies why does this process of entailment not extend down to
the level of first order probability arguments? Perhaps the
answer lies in the recognition that to do so is extremely
difficult, in fact impossible, if one wants to avoid the lottery paradox. For the condition C that a first order probability claim must meet seems to be a high enough probability
to merit acceptance on no other grounds. Awareness of this
requirement might be the reason why Sellars claims that the
conclusion of a first order probability argument is non-metric.
That way he avoids the lottery paradox by ignoring it.
But that gambit won't work either. For the first order
probability argument conclusion acts as a promissory note for
a practical argument which cannot be completed, but which is
a logical consequence of the general policy behind the use
of probability in the first place. Thus we are forced to
conclude either that there is no good reason for accepting
the conclusion of a first order probability argument or that
the reason for accepting it is the result of a series of
implied policies stemming from a general policy, which policy
in turn is a result of the basic non-metric sense of 'probable'. This last approach is clearly circular.
Modes of Probability
Sellars not only believes that the practical reasoning lies
at the heart of probability, he also remains convinced of two
other points about probability, both of which have a bearing
on the structure of arguments leading to the conclusion
h is probable.
468 D-l
First, depending on the nature of h, the mode of probability
varies, h can be either a theory, a rule of inference or a
statistical empirical claim. For Sellars there are different
modes of probability; the mod$ of probability is a function of
the character of h.
We have already taken note
ability arguments: first and
that the conclusion of a seco
allows us to reconstruct cert&
responding practical argument
ity argument is incomplete in
it,
of two different types of probsecond order. They differ in
i(id order probability argument
in key features of its corwhile the first order probabilthis respect. As Sellars puts
the first order probability statement
It is probable^ that-p
where the subscript 'M' i
of probability, serves as
zation of
I shall accept that-p.
pdicates a specific mode
a promissory note authori-
(pp. 206-207)
It remains a promissory note because the argument it points
to cannot be complete; we lack the relevant information. A
second order probability statement does provide the relevant
information. A second order probability statement permits
the reconstruction of the rel
cause it mentions the reasons
yzing this type of statement
ble' and 'I shall accept h' a
plications becomes clear.
e • (h, e) makes h prob
evant practical argument befor 'h is probable.' In analthe sense in which 'h is probare consequents of dependent imable
1 order of dependence among the
y. The availability of a concluSecondly, there is a logica
different modes of probabilit
sion
h is probable
where h is a theory, depends
conclusions of which 'h' is a
turn depends on the prior ava
derived from arguments of the
These, as it turns out, depenjd on a prior use of inductive
reasoning. In this section I] follow Sellars' procedure and
concentrate on that mode of probability appropriate to theories. But, as becomes increasingly apparent, while the
structure of probability arguments with respect to theories
on the prior availability of
rule of inference. This in
liability of statistical claims
appropriate mode of probability,
D-2 469
may stand out most clearly, the interesting issues lie in the
mode of probability which produces statistical claims. For
at this level we first encounter the concept of probability
in metrical guise. And the immediate problem then is to
see why Sellars' use of the straight rule should not lead
him into all the problems traditionally associated with this
approach to metrical probability, e.g., Goodman's grue problems. The answer lies in Sellars' use of the straight rule
to produce only empirical claims. The use of those empirical
claims requires rules of inference, the adoption of which is
not an empirical matter at all, but a practical one. But
since this rests on the first order probability argument, it
appears that we can't get off the ground.
35. The mode or probability in connection with
which the relevant factors stand out most
clearly is that of the probability of theories— in spite of the fact that the latter
logically involves all the other forms of
probability. Consider the following piece
of reasoning, there 'T' is a surrogate for
the sentence which expresses the conjunctive
proposition the conjuncts of which are the
principles of a certain theory.
T is the simplest available framework
which generates acceptable approximations of nomologically probable lawlike statements and generates no falsified
law-like statements [from now on, the
statement that T has this complex property,
will be represented by '<|>(T)']
Therefore, I shall accept T.
36. Notice that this is (a) a practical argument;
(b) an enthymene. Its principle is, therefore,
a dependent implication and, indeed
1 shall accept frameworks which are <j>
'HT)' 'I shall accept T'
To this implication there corresponds the probability^ statement
T is probable^.
i.e., the meta-practical statement
there is something which is the case which
dependently implies 'I shall accept T'
470
D-3
and correspondingly to this the meta-probability^
statement —
<f>(T) makes it probable*. that T is true
i. e . ,
4>(T) there is something which
*-------) dependently implies 'I
shall accept T' (p. 208)
But as it stands this account is incomplete. For, recalling
the discussion of the previous section, the practical argument
culminating in the conclusion
I shall accept T
has two major premises, the proximate and the ultimate. The
proximate major here is
I shall accept frameworks which are <J>.
The ultimate major is
I shall bring about E.
The sense in which the ultimate major entails the proximate
major constitutes one of the most interesting facets of Sellars' theory. Why should I accept the policy contained in
the statement of the proximate major? According to Sellars,
it is analytically implied by the ultimate major of the practical argument implied by the conclusion to the probability
argument,
T is probable*..
The whole purpose behind using probability arguments is to
be able to produce explanations; to give explanations one
must be in possession of the means to offer explanations, i.e..
one must be in an explanatory framework, a theory. Now using
probability arguments one ends up with conclusions whose analysis says you can formulate a practical argument incorporating the results of your use of the probability reasoning,
with the conclusion,
I shall accept that-p<
The existence of such an argument is entailed by using probability
arguments in the first place, otherwise why would you have
D-4
471
sought a conclusion of the type that results from such reason
ing? By using probability arguments you already commit yourself to the existence of the practical argument. By committing yourself to the practical argument you commit yourself
to the purpose behind the practical reasoning, which constitutes the basis for your having used the probability arguments in the first place. Thus you are committed to some
general goal, which goal entails a policy toward accepting
the results or probability arguments. If this isn't a circular argument then perhaps there is nothing wrong with
Sellars' account But consider:
1. Accepting a non-metric sense of 'probable' entails
accepting the purpose behind probability arguments .
2. Accepting the purpose behind probability arguments
entails accepting the general policy E.
3. Accepting E entails accepting the subpolicies
entailed by E.
4. Accepting both E and its subpolicies entails accepting the use of practical reasoning.
But, 5. Accepting the use of practical reasoning means
recognizing that the availability of a probability
argument entails there are good reasons to accept the conclusion of probability arguments
since this is entailed by the meaning of 'probable. '
To place this all in the context of the reasoning surround
ing the acceptance of a theory means that we use probability
arguments because we wish to arrive at a conclusion concerning the logical relation which obtains between an hypothesis
and some data. But we want that information in the first
place to help us achieve some goal, E. Thus probabilistic
reasoning is goal oriented. The specific goal in mind here
is that of being in an explanatory framework.
But why should one accept the policy? By what end
is it analytically implied? Surely the state of
being in possession of such frameworks logically
implies accepting such frameworks if one does not
already have them. And that this state is in the end
in question is supported by the fact that it simply
unpacks the concept of being able to give nontrivial explanatory accounts of established laws.
(p. 2 1 0 )
The purpose of using probability arguments of mode T is to
obtain an explanatory framework. This entails accepting Fg
if one doesn't already have one. It also entails rejecting
472 D-5
the explanatory framework we are using if it is not identical
with the one mentioned by the conclusion of the practical
argument. And all this seems reasonable and correct.
This leaves us in the position of saying that we are justified in accepting a theory if it succeeds in bringing us
closer to our goal of being able to give explanations. Does
this, however, require that some final theory, FT, be obtainable? I think not.
The justification given above for accepting a theory is
that it brings us closer to giving explanations, we can go
right on rejecting theories that are inadequate if we can
also construct theories that at least tell us more about what
there is than old theories have been able to do.
Furthermore Sellars does not claim and it does not seem
reasonable to insist that for our acceptance of T to be
justified T be true. If we could show that T were true we
would be validating T. But the validation of theories is
a different problem than the justification of a policy concerning the acceptance of theories. The validation of T
entails conclusively verifying T. It has been well argued
that we can never completely verify an empirical theory. One
simple reason concerns the fact that verification involves
showing that all possible evidence for the theory favours the
theory. Since the future remains indeterminate, the future
evidence is unavailable, hence the body of evidence is incomplete .
But that argument does not rule out the possibility of
justifying a policy toward the acceptance of theories. Rather
than concern himself with the problems of verifying or validating theories, Sellars directs his attention to vindicating
his policy to adopt theories constituting more complete explanatory frameworks. If following the policy produces the
desired results, we are justified in following the policy.
If we do not obtain the desired reaults then we were not justified using that policy. The ends justify the means.
But even if following a given policy does produce the goal
how can we justifiably claim that continued use of that policy
will produce continued good results? We can't. Vindication
remains a very weak form of justification.
But to look at the problem of justification in this light
is to place the burden on the construction of a theory without
fully appreciating the role of a theory: explanation. Thus
it would be more appropriate to say that the vindication of
inductive policies is the explanations we can offer using
the theory the policy helped develop. In this way we put the
473
D-6
burden of the justification job on the explanatory function
of the theory.
If we now recall that different modes of probability are
said to stand in a logical order of dependence, with the
probability of theories resting on nomological probability,
we can begin to understand the full import of the following
claim.
For the end-in-view in nomological induction (which
must not be confused with the mode of induction involved in the statistical or proportional syllogism
to be explained in a moment) is not the possession
of empirical truth, but the realizing of a logically
necessary condition of being in the very framework
of explanation and prediction i.e., being able to
draw inferences concerning the unknown and explanatory
accounts of the known, (p. 219)
If as a matter of fact we can make true inferences from the
known to the unknown and give explanations, i.e., tell what
the thing in question is, then, for Sellars, we are vindicated in our use of the policy which says: accept those theories which are <j>. And despite the various problems in Sellars' account of 'probable', this is worth saving.
To develop this point in more detail let us consider the
mode of probability called "nomological". Lawlike statements,
for Sellars, are rules of inference. They are not to be confused with universally quantified material implications or
statistical claims. A law is not an empirical claim. The
point,of nomological induction, the form of induction located
in the probability argument leading to the conclusion
h is probablen
is to arrive at the terminal outcome:
the acceptance of h.
The purpose of nomological induction is the espousal of rules
of inference which are lawlike statements.
Now the inductive move does not occur within the probability
reasoning itself. Nor can we locate it in the practical argument. It is manifested in the shift from the claim that there
is a logical relation between the hypothesis in question and
a body of evidence,
Rl (h, e)
474
D-7
to the claim
h is probable.^
That this constitutes the inductive move must be the case
for two reasons. First, nothing else could count as induction
as opposed to probabilistic inference in the strictest readings of those concepts. Sellars correctly cautions from the
start concerning the difference between probability reasoning
and inductive reasoning. As a matter of fact he goes so far
as to claim that it is a mistake to approach induction through
the notion of probability, where we suppose he means that such
a program attempts to reduce induction to nothing more than
probability. Secondly, his argument against Carnap's logical
theory of probability, which cautions against reducing the
ground of probability to probability itself, can only be interpreted to mean that the strictly logical relation does
not entail
h is probable.
Consider what he has to say about Carnap.
63. What is the relation of my account to Carnap's?
A fundamental similarity is that on neither
account is there such a thing as an inductive
argument of which the conclusion is the hypothesis characterized as probable. In this
sense there is no "rule of detachment." On
the other hand we differ in that on my view
the assertion of the hypothesis is the 'terminal outcome' of a rational sequence of events
the occurring of which is the whole point of
the inductive enterprise.
64. We agree that the fact that the evidence
makes the hypothesis probable is, given that
the evidence obtains, a matter of logic rather
than of empirical fact— though I would emphasize the presupposition of a major
practical premise. On the other hand, his
account of inductive argument never reaches
the practical reasoning which is its core,
but remains at the level of second order
probability statements and arguments. From
my point of view, he fails to see that h
is probable on e [because (h, e)] is a
second level probability — statement of
the form
475
D-8
I shall bring about E .
Rl (h, e)
e ^ It is probable that h
the ultimate inferential cash value (practical
outcome) of which is the reasoning
e
therefore I shall accept h.
Still, the ultimate cash value (terminal outcome) is the state of accepting h which results from carrying out this reasoned intention. Now given that Carnap overlooked this
practical dimension there was, as I see it,
nothing to prevent him from making the serious
mistake of reducing
h is probable on e [because RT (h, e)]
to -
Rl (h, e)
and thus identifying a ground of probability
with probability itself. By doing so he turns
the analytic connection between probability
and the intention to accept a hypothesis into
a puzzling synthetic connection between a
logical fact
Rl (h, e)
and the reasonableness of accepting h. This
leads him into attempts to explain the reasonableness of accepting h in terms of the
reasonableness of a policy of action, e.g.,
betting, whereas the truth of the matter, as
I see it, is that the reasonableness of
policies of action is to be explained in
terms of the reasonableness of accepting
hypotheses about the outcomes of actions.
(pp. 219-220)
If I am right, the second order probability statement Sellars
refers to incorporates the crucial inductive move at issue.
The ground of probability remains the logical relation. Probability itself involves the assertion of the reasonableness
of accepting h, a function of the logical relation but not
the relation itself. Once the move has been made from the
logical relation to the claim that
476
D-9
h is probable,
then the practical dimension is implied by virtue of the meaning of "probable." In that case, to conclude that h is probable, and hence reasonable to accept, on the basis of a purely
logical relation is to make an inductive inference. From the
knowledge that a certain logical relation obtains, we infer
that something can be asserted on the basis of an argument
implying that knowledge.
But now let us return to the explication of nomological
probability. Working backward from the conclusion of the
practical argument resulting in
I shall accept 'LL1
(where 'LL' is the abbreviation for some lawlike statement).
Sellars eventually states the goal of nomological induction.
Let us follow his steps.
51. Clearly the practical argument for which we
are looking culminates in something like
n/m examined As and B therefore
I shall accept 'that K is an unexamined class of As implies that
approximately n/m K is B'
and this points to premise which expresses
a general conditional intention, thus roughly,
I shall accept 'that K is an un^
examined finite class of Xs implies that approximately n/m Ks
are Y, ' if n/m of the examined
Xs are Y
or, to represent this premise in a way which
explicitly mentions something which is (partially) shown by the above formulation,
I shall accept a P-implication
if it accords with the observed facts
Needless to say, this highlights the question
'What is it for a P-implication to accord
with observed facts?' The answer to this
question is implied by the answer to the
question 'What is the end-in-view with respect to which this policy is the logically
necessary means?' For on our general account
Û-10 477
of probability, the practical reasoning
for which we are looking must have something like the following structure
I shall being about E
But bringing about E logically
implies accepting a P-implication if it accords with observed
facts
So I shall accept a P-implication if it accords with observed
facts
'That K is an unobserved finite
class of As implies that approximately n/m K is B' accords with the observed facts
Therefore I shall accept this
P-implication
52. What then is E and how does it explain what
is meant by saying that a law-like statement
accords with the observational evidence? The
answer is surprisingly simple. E is the state
of being able to draw inferences concerning
the composition with respect to a given property Y of unexamined finite samples (AK) of
a kind, X, in a way which also provides an
explanatory account of the composition with
respect to Y of the total examined sample, K,
of X. (p. 215)
Thus, the sense in which the probability of theories depends on nomological probability is the sense in which having
rules of inference is a prerequisite for accepting a theory
wherein we can reason from the known to the unknown. With
this in mind we can understand how the policy to accept theories which are $ can be vindicated. The policy can be vindicated if indeed we can make those inferences and offer those
explanations for which having a theory is logically necessary. The policy is vindicated if by following the policy
we end up accepting a theory in which sound inductive inferences are possible.
Returning to the different modes of probability, only a few
comments need to be added. The question: "Which rules of inference should we accept?" remains unanswered. The decision
to espouse a rule of inference occurs in the context of attempting to realize being in Fg . Hence, we accept only those
rules of inference which contribute to that end. We are
justified in acting of following that policy does in fact put
us in F .
e
D - l l
478
As can be easily noted from the long quote above giving
Sellars' reasoning concerning the practical argument appropriate to nomological probability, there is also another dimension to the acceptance of rules of inference. We accept
rules not just to be in any F , but to be in a framework appropriate to phenomena of a given kind.
Rules of inference mention certain empirical claims. The
formulation of those empirical claims remains a function of
another mode of probability, the proximate conclusion of which
is the claim that a certain empirical regularity is in a
given degree. This mode of probability is a logical prerequisite to nomological probability insofar as these claims
are a part of law-like statements. But, with respect to our
interests, Sellars' discussion of this aspect of his theory
would carry us far afield. A more important point for our
purposes is that a metric analysis of probability, supposedly
enters at the level of formulating empirical claims. Sellars
explains the relation between this metric notion and the basic
sense of "probable" at work up to this point in the following
way.
68. The fundamental rationale of this connection
is bound up with the fact that although
prob (h, e) = 1/4
doesn't warrant
I shall accept h
it is, on the other hand, true that where
prob (h,, e) = 1/4
prob (hg, e) = 1/2
then
prob (h^v hg, e) = 3/4
and this does warrant
I shall accept 'h-^v hg '
69. Thus the meaning of the metrical functor is
logically tied to the basic concept of probability as 'reasonable-to-accept-ness.' Over
and above the tie between
prob (h, e) < 1/2
D-12
479
and
e makes it probable that-h
and hence between the former and
it is probable that-h
as well as
I shall accept h
the apparatus of statistical and proportional
probability is largely the logic and mathematics
of combinations, and the chief philosophical
interest concerns the ends-in-view and entailed
policies which support the apparatus. (p. 221)
The crucial claim here is that the meaning of metric functor
is tied to the basic notion in such a way that a probability
of over .5 automatically warrants the conclusion that one
shall accept a conclusion which has the probability. This
has led Hilpinen to characterize Sellars as a user of the rule
of high probability.^ But since, as we have seen, Sellars
denies that there is a rule of detachment at work in his theoty, we must at least try to uncover the secret to understanding what is^ going on there.
An explication of the sense in which the non-metric and the
metric senses of "probable" are tied together is the best we
can do. Let us read Sellars' claim that
prob (h, e) <1/2
is required before it follows that
I shall accept that-h
in the following way. We use probability reasoning to a certain end. The attempt to achieve that end is implicit in the
appeal to probability theory. As such, the policies which
are a logical consequent of pursuing that goal influence our
actions in what we might call the explanatory probabilitycontext. The policy to accept a given statement on certain
conditions is therefore implicit in arguing that only an
hypothesis which stands in a relation to its evidence such
that the probability of the hypothesis on the evidence is 3
3
R. Hilpinen, Rules of Acceptence and Inductive Logic, Acta
Philosophica Fennica, Rase. XXII (Amsterdam: North-Holland,
1968).
480 D-13
greater than .5 can lead to the conclusion that
I shall accept h.
Thus, we are to read "probable',' strictly. If a given
statement is probable then there exists a practical argument
in its logical neighborhood which has as its terminus ad quern
I shall accept h.
In reconstructing the practical argument we must pay particular
attention to the proximate major. For there we find stated
the conditions, C, under which h is to be accepted. Incorporated in C we find the requirement that more than fifty
percent of the logical relation established between the hypothesis and its evidence be greater than fifty percent. We
should only accept those empirical claims for which there
exists a good chance of reasoning correctly about the remainder
of their data, which remainder remains unexamined. We desire
to be in a position where we can infer on the basis of what
we know to what is as yet unknown.
prob (h, e) < 1/2
constitutes the minimal condition under which this objective
can be accomplished.
But, that this really does amount to a minimal condition
is demonstrable only if accepting the policy does indeed produce F . And even then that such a policy helped produce one
Fg hardly justifies our belief that it will continue to do
so if used in similar endeavors. That is, we have no rule of
detachment which asserts that if the probability of h on e is
greater than .5, accept it as true. Instead we have a policy
that ways we should accept hypotheses with that degree of probability because they represent the minimal empirical condition which we can use to produce F . Of course we don't know
that we can produce F0 by following this policy, but if we can
then the policy will be vindicated.
Effectively this amounts to stacking our policies. If we
vindicate the policy that ends up putting us in F , we vindicate the policies which we used in leading up to that situation. But once again, that still does not warrant continued
use of those policies.
Conclusion
The problem with this theory is there are too many unacceptable conditions involved. If you accept the meaning of
D-14
481
'probable' Sellars advocates, you are compelled to use the
straight rule even when there is no constructible practical
argument for accepting the conclusions of first order probability arguments. But, we were told that taking the basic
meaning of 'probable' entails there are such practical arguments. Thus we are left in the position of concluding that
probability arguments entail practical arguments for accepting conclusions of probability arguments even when no such
practical argument can be constructed, ie.e in the case of
first order probability arguments which are incomplete in
principle. Paradoxical conclusions of this sort detract
from whatever merits viewing the end in view of induction as
explanation may have.
Joseph C. Pitt
Virginia Polytechnic Institute
and State University
Department of Philosophy and Religion
Blacksburg, Virginia 24061
482
E-l