4 What is Needed An ideal representation of an argumentative debate would be one that combines a Delhomme-style graph of the debate structure with a standard diagramming graph of the structure of each of the arguments that are represented by the nodes of the debate structure. To my mind, then, this ideal representation would have the following requirements: 1. Two levels of representation: the debate graph and the argument diagram. a. Each would be a graphical representation with nodes and edges. i. The debate graph would represent whole arguments as nodes and the support/object/rebut relationships between arguments as edges. ii. The argument diagram would represent the statements in which an argument consists as nodes and the inferential connections between the statements as edges. 2. Both the debate-level graph and the argument level graph should allow for a large number of nodes, although the medium in which the graphs are represented (program, slide, paper) should be a consideration. 3. The edges of the debate-level graph should allow color-coding of either the nodes or the edges, or both (one color for support, another for objection, and possibly a third for rebuttal, etc.) so it would be straightforward to determine the general flow of the debate at a glance. 4. The edges of the argument-level graph need not be color coded to indicate support/objection/rebuttal relationships, and so, while not necessary, color-coding could be used instead to represent features of the statements (conditional, probabilistic, etc.) and/or the inferences (deductive, inductive, abductive, etc.). 5. The user should have a way to “expand” the debate-level nodes to see a graphical representation of the internal structure of any argument, and then “collapse” these nodes so as not to perpetually take up valuable representation space.

Requirement (5) above is, I think the critical feature of the debate representation, and in principle should be straightforward to implement. In her dissertation, Khartabil (2020) develops and user-tests a few versions of the kind of computer supported argument visualization that does this, although she was not using them to represent the two levels of representation I have outlined here. Rather, she was using them to “zoom in on” the structure of different parts of very complex arguments. As noted above, Khartabil was trying to accommodate the limitations that experts in the argument diagramming community described as drawbacks to traditional argument diagramming tools; in other words, she wanted to be able to represent arguments with hundreds or more boxes while not giving up the information contained in the box and arrow graphs. All of her versions started with representing the overall argument as a sunburst, instead of the traditional tree structure (see Fig. 12). One of the versions then has a “pop-out” feature that displays a part of the argument as a “node-link” layout (see Fig. 13). The kind of ideal debate representation I have in mind would use the “pop-out” feature to connect the debate level graph with the argument-level graphs (see Fig. 14).

Conclusion In my own teaching, I value the process of students learning argumentation by constructing argument diagrams. My students create diagrams to represent their individual and collaborative understanding of the arguments in the texts we read, as well as to assist in evaluation of the same arguments. My students also create diagrams of their own essays to aid their writing process, as well as create diagrams of each other’s essay drafts to facilitate peer review. Fortunately, there are many options for computer supported argument visualization, and I can choose according to my specific needs for any given class. Argument diagrams do, however, have substantial limitations, especially when analyzing long texts. They are also quite limited in their ability to accurately and easily represent debates that authors have either with themselves in a single text, or with others across multiple texts. Using debates in my classes to teach argumentation has, therefore, always been quite frustrating; and despite recognizing the benefits that it might have in many classes, I don’t use it as much as I would like. There are, of course, options available for representing debates, but for the reasons outlined above, they do not meet the requirements I have for a successful tool of this sort.

Thus, I have introduced the specifications for the sort of tool which would allow me to use debates to teach argumentation in my classes. There are so many excellent historic and contemporary debates I could use to teach a variety of concepts, from issues in the nature of the mind to argumentative fallacies. It would also be wonderful to be able to have my students engage in their own debates in class or online while also having a visual way to represent and keep track of those debates for both the short and long term. If I have persuaded anyone to take up the task of building such a program, then I would consider myself a very fortunate teacher indeed.